the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT
opencourseware at
ocw.mit.edu doesn't run Flash Player so
I had to run them on the on um uh Chrome
all right so um let's move on to our
second chapter and hopefully in this
chapter you will feel a little better if
you felt like it was going a bit fast in
the first chapter and the main reason
why I actually went fast especially in
terms of you know conference interval
some of you came and asked me what do
you mean by this is a conference interal
what does it mean that it's not
happening in there with probability 95%
Etc I just went really fast so that you
could see why I didn't want to give you
a first week doing you know probability
only and without understanding uh what
the cont thetical context for it was
right so hopefully all these things that
we've done in terms of probability you
actually know why we've been doing this
and so we're basically going to go back
to what we're doing maybe start with
some statistical uh setup but the goal
of this lecture is really going to go
back again to what we've seen from a
purely uh uh statistical perspective all
right so the first thing uh we're going
to do is explain why we're doing
statistical modeling right so in
practice if I if you have data If You
observe a bunch of points and here I
gave you uh some uh some some numbers
for example so here's a partial data set
with the number of siblings including
self that were collected from college
students a few years back right so I was
teaching a class like yours and I
actually asked students to go and fill
out some Google form and tell me a bunch
of things and one of the questions was
including yourself how many siblings do
you have and so they gave me this list
of numbers right and uh and there's many
ways I can think of this list of numbers
right I could think of it as being just
a discrete Distribution on the set of
numbers between one I mean I know
there's not going to be an answer which
is less than one unless uh well someone
doesn't understand the question but uh
all the answers I should get are
positive integers 1 two 3 Etc and you
know there probably is an upper bound
but I don't know it on the top of my
head so maybe I should say 100 uh maybe
I should say 15 uh depends right and so
I think the largest number I got for
this was six all right so uh um here you
can see you have pretty uh standard
families you know lots of ones twos and
threes okay so the way what statistical
modeling is doing is to try to compress
this information that I could actually
describe in a very naive way so let's
start with the basic uh uh uh usual
statistical setup right so I will start
many of the board that look like
X1 xn random
variables and what I'm going to assume
as we said typically is that those guys
are IID and they have some distribution
all right so they all share the same
distribution and the fact that they're
IID is so that I can actually do
statistics statistics means you know
looking at the global uh averaging
things so that I I can actually get a
sense of what the global behavior is for
the population right if I start assuming
that those things are not identically
distributed they all live on their own
right that my sequence of number is your
number of siblings uh the shoe size of
this person uh the depth of the Charles
River and I start measuring a bunch of
stuff there's nothing I'm going to
actually get together I need to have
something that's cohesive and so here uh
uh I collected some data that was
cohesive and so the goal here the first
thing is to say what is the distribution
that I actually have here
right so I could actually be very
general I could just
say it's some distribution p and let's
say those are they're random variables
not random vectors right I could collect
entire vectors about students but let's
say those are just random
variables and so now I can start making
assumptions on this distribution P right
what can I say about a distribution well
maybe if those numbers are continuous
for example I could assume they have a
density right a probability density
function that's already an assumption
maybe I could start to assume that their
probability density function is smooth
that's another assumption maybe I could
actually assume that it's peaceway
constant that's even better better right
and those things make my life simpler
and simpler because what I do by making
the Su successive assumptions is
reducing the degrees of freedom of the
space in which I'm actually searching
the
distribution and so what we actually
want is to have something which is small
enough so we can actually have some
averaging going on but we also want
something which is uh uh big enough that
it can actually express it has chances
of actually containing a distribution
that makes sense for us so let's start
with the simplest possible example which
is when the
XIs belong to
01 and as I said here we don't have a
choice the distribution of those guys
has to
be Burn only and since they're IID they
all share the same P right so that's
definitely the simplest possible thing I
could think of they're just burnly
P okay and so all I would have to figure
out in this case is p
and you know this is the simplest case
and unsurprisingly it has the simplest
answer right we will come back to this
example when we study maximum likelihood
estimators or method of Moments
estimators by the method of moments but
at the end of the
day uh uh uh the things that we did the
things that we will do are always the
naive estimator you would come up with
is what is the proportion of one and
this will be in pretty much all respects
the best estimator you can can think of
all right so then we're going to try to
assess his performance and we saw how to
do that in the first chapter as well so
this problem here somehow is completely
understood we'll come back to it but
there's nothing fancy that's going to
happen but now I could have some more
complicated things right so for example
in in the example of the students now my
XIs belong to the sequence of integers
one two three Etc okay which is also
denoted by n
maybe without zero if you want to put
zero in N right so the positive
integers or I could actually just maybe
put some prior knowledge about how
humans have time to have families but
you know maybe some some people thought
of uh their college mates as being their
brothers and sisters and one student
would actually put you know
465 siblings because you know we're all
good friends and uh or maybe they
actually think that all their uh
Facebook contact are actually their
siblings and so you know you never know
what's going to happen so you maybe you
want to account for this but maybe you
know that people are reasonable and they
will actually give you something like
this now intuitively maybe you would say
well why would you bother doing this if
you're not really sure about the 20 but
I think that probably all of you
intuitively guess that this is probably
a good idea to start putting this kind
of assumptions rather than allowing for
any number in the first place because
this eventually will be
injected into the Precision of our
estimator if I don't if I allow anything
it's going to be more complicated for me
to get an accurate estimator if I know
that the numbers are either one or two
then I'm actually going to be slightly
more accurate as well all right because
I know that if for example somebody put
a five I can remove it then it's not
going to actually screw up with my
estimator all right
so
now let's say we actually agree that we
have numbers and here I put uh seven
numbers okay so I just said well now the
numbers let's assume that the numbers
I'm going to get are going to be one all
the way to
say this number that I denote by larger
than or equal to seven which is a
placeholder for any number larger than
seven okay because I know maybe I don't
want to distinguish between people who
have nine or 25 sbls okay and so now
this is a distribution on seven possible
values discrete distributions and you
know from you know your probability
class that the way you describe this
distribution is using the probability
Mass
function okay or
pmf okay so that's what how we describe
a discrete distribution and the
pmf is a uh just a list of numbers right
so as I wrote here you have a list of
numbers and here you wrote the possible
value that your random variable can take
and here you write the probability that
your random variable takes this value
okay so the possible values being one
two three all the way to larger than or
equal to seven and then I'm trying to
estimate those numbers right if I give
you those numbers at least up to this
you know compression of all numbers
larger than or equal to seven you have a
full description of your distribution
and that is the ultimate goal of
Statistics right your the ultimate goal
of Statistics is to say what
distribution your data came from because
that's basically the best you're going
to be able to do now admittedly if I
started looking at the fraction of ones
and the fraction of twos and the
fraction of Threes Etc I would actually
eventually get those
numbers right just like looking at the
fraction of on gave me a good estimate
for p in the verly case it would do the
same in this case right it's a pretty
intuitive idea it's just the law of
large
numbers every every body agrees with
that if I look at the proportion of ones
the proportion of twos the proportion of
Threes that should actually give me
something that gets closer and closer as
my sample size increasing increases to
what I
want but the problem is if my sample
size is not huge here I have seven
numbers to estimate and if I have you
know 20 observations the ratio is not
really in my favor right I mean you know
20 observations to estimate seven
parameters some of them are going to be
pretty off typically the ones with the
large values right if I have only 20
students look at the list of numbers I
don't know how many numbers I have but
it probably is close to 20 maybe 15 or
something and so if you look at this
list no nobody's actually H nobody
has four or more siblings in this list
right there's no such person so that
means that eventually with from this
data set my estimates so those numbers I
denote by say P1 P2 P3 etc those
estimates P4 hat would be equal to what
from this
data zero right and P5 hat would be
equal to zero and P6 hat would be equal
to zero and P larger than or equal to
seven hat would be equal to zero that
would be my estimates from this data
set so maybe this is not maybe I want to
actually pull some
information from the people who have
less siblings to try to make a guess
which is probably slightly better for
the larger values right it's pretty
clear that in average there's more than
zero the proportion of the population uh
with of households that have uh four
children or more is definitely more than
zero all right so it means that my data
set is not representative and what I'm
going to try to do is to find a model
that try to use the data I have for the
smaller values that I can observe and
just pull it up to the other ones and so
what we can do is to just reduce those
parameters into something that's you
know understood and this is part of the
modeling that I I talked about in the
first place now how do you s suly
describe a number of something well one
thing that you do is the pone
distribution right why the I mean
there's many reasons right I mean again
that's part of statistical modeling but
once you know that you have number of
something that can be modeled by a pesso
why not try a pesso right you could just
fit a pesso and the pesso is something
that looks like this I I I guess you've
all all seen it but if x follows
Aon distribution with parameter Lambda
then the probability that X is equal to
Little X is equal to uh Lambda to the X
over factorial x e to the minus
Lambda
okay and if you've did the the the first
the sheet that I gave you on the first
day you can check that those numbers so
this is of course for x equal Z one Etc
right so X is in uh natural integers and
if you sum from xal 0 to Infinity this
thing you get e to the Lambda and so
they cancel and you have a sum which is
equal to one so it's indeed a pmf but
what's key about this pmf is that it
never takes value zero but this thing is
always strictly positive so whatever
value of Lambda I find from this data
will give me something that's certainly
more interesting than just putting the
value zero but more importantly rather
than having to estimate seven
parameters and as a consequence to
actually have to estimate one two three
four of them being equal to zero I have
only one parameter to estimate which is
LDA the problem with doing this is that
now Lambda may not be just something as
simple as Computing the average
number right I mean in this case it will
but but but in many instances it's
actually not clear that this
parameterization with Lambda that I
chose is I'm going to be able to
estimate Lambda just by Computing the
average number that I
see it will be the case but if it's not
you know remember this example of the
exponential we did in the last lecture
we could use the Delta method and things
like that to estimate
it all right so here's uh here's the you
know modeling 101 so the purpose of
modeling is to restrict the the the
space of possible distributions to a
Subspace that's actually plausible but
much simpler for me to estimate right so
we R we went from all distributions on
seven parameters which is a large space
that's a lot of things to something
which is just one number to estimate now
this number is
positive
okay any question about the purpose of
doing
this okay
so we're going to have to do a little
bit of formalism now and so if we want
to talk right this is statistic class
I'm not going to want to talk about the
P model specifically every single time
I'm going to want to talk about generic
models and then you're going to be able
to plug in your favorite word you know
Pon binomial exponential uniform all
these words that you've seen you're
going to be able to plug in there but
we're just going to have some generic
notation some generic terminology for a
statistical model all right so here's
the formal definition so I'm going to go
uh through it with you
okay so the
definition is that of a statistical
model okay and
so uh sorry that's a statistical
experiment I should say
uh I'm sorry
okay so a statistical experiment is
actually just a
pair
e and that's a
set and a family of
distributions P Theta where Theta ranges
in some set Capital Theta okay so I hope
you're up to date with your uh Greek
letters so it's a small Theta that's a
capital Theta I know I'm not the best uh
I don't have the best handwriting so if
you don't see something just ask me okay
and so this thing now so each of this
guy is a probability
distribution all right so for
example this could be a
Pon with parameter Theta or a burnly
with parameter
Theta okay or an
exponential with perameter I don't know
1 over Theta squ if you
want okay they're just indexed by Theta
but for each Theta this completely
describes the
distribution it could be more
complicated this Theta should be a pair
could be a pair of mu Sigma square and
that could actually give you some n mu
Sigma
Square okay so anything where you can
actually rather than actually giving you
a uh uh full distribution I can compress
it into a parameter but it could be
worse it could be this guy here right
Thea
could be
P1 P larger than or equal to 7 and my
distribution could just be something
that has
pmf P1 P larger than
7 right that's another parameter is this
one has seven seven it's seven
dimensional this one is two dimensional
and all these guys are just one
dimensional okay all these guys are
parameters is that clear what's
important here is that once I give you
Theta you know exactly all the
probabilities Associated to this random
variable you know its distribution
perfectly okay so
here uh uh so this is the defin is that
clear for everyone is there a question
about this
distribution about this definition
sorry all right so really the key thing
is the statistical model Associated to a
statistical experiment
okay so let's just see some examples
exle is probably just better because
again with formalism it's never really
clear uh actually uh that's the next
slide okay
so there's two things we need to assume
I mean there's okay
so the purpose of a statistical model is
to once I estimate the parameter I
actually know exactly what distribution
I have okay so it means
that I could potentially have several
parameters that give me the same
distribution that would still be fine
because I could estimate one guy or I
could estimate the other guy and I would
still recover the underlying
distribution of my data the problem is
that this creates really annoying
theoretical problems like things don't
work the algorithms won't work the
guarantees won't work and so what we
typically assume is that the model is
so-called wellp
specified all right sorry that's not
well specified U I'm jumping ahead of
myself okay well specified means
that your data the the distribution of
your data is actually one of those
guys okay so some uh
vocabulary so well specified means that
for my observations
X there exists a Theta in capital Theta
such that X follows p subeta
I should put a double
bar okay so that's what wellp specified
means okay so that means that the
distribution of your actual data is just
one of those
guys this is a
bit strong of an assumption all right
it's strong in the sense that you know I
don't know if you've heard of this uh
sentence uh which I don't know I can
tell you who it's attributed to but
that's probably means that this person
did not come up with it uh but it said
that um all models are wrong but some of
them are
useful all right so all models are wrong
means that maybe it's not true that this
Pon distribution that I assume for the
number of siblings for college students
maybe that's not perfectly correct maybe
there's a spike at three right maybe
there's a spike at one because you know
maybe those are slightly more educated
families they have less children maybe
this is actually not exactly perfect but
it's probably good enough for our
purposes and when we make this
assumption we're actually assuming that
the data really comes from a pestl model
there is a lot of research that goes on
about misspecified models and that tells
you how well you're doing in the model
that's the closest to the actual
distribution that's pretty much it
yeah X is uh so right so by
data so it's always the way I gener I I
denote one of the generic observations
right so my observations are X1
xn and they're IID with distribution P
always so X is just one of those guys I
don't want to write x five or X4 it's
just one they're IID so they all have
the same distribution so
okay no no no they're all IID so they
all have the same P Theta they all have
the same p which means they'll have the
same Peta so I can Pi any one of them so
I just remove the index just work quick
okay so when I write X I just mean think
of X1 right there IDE I can pick
whichever I want I'm not going to write
X1 it's going to be
weird
okay is that clear okay
so this uh particular Theta is called
the true parameter
sometime to since we're going to want
some variable Theta we might denote it
by Theta
Star as opposed to Theta hat which is
always a rator but uh I'll keep it to be
Theta for
now and uh so the the aim of the
statistical experiment is to estimate
Theta so that once I actually plug in
Theta in the form of my distribution for
example I could plug in Theta here so
Theta here was
actually Lambda so once I estimate this
guy I would plug it in and I would know
the probability that my random variable
takes any value right by just putting a
Lambda hat and Lambda hat here okay so
my goal is going to be to estimate this
guy so that I can actually compute those
distributions but actually we'll see for
example when we talk about regression
that this parameter actually has a
meaning in many instances and so just
knowing the parameter itself intuitively
or say more let's say more so than just
Computing probabilities will actually
tell us something about the process so
for example we're going to run linear
regression and when we do linear
regression there's going to be some
coefficients in the linear regression
and the value of this coefficient is
actually telling me what is the
sensitivity of the response that I'm
looking at to this particular input all
right so just knowing if this number is
large or if this number is SL small is
actually going to be useful for us to
just look at this
guy all right so there's going to be
some instances where it's going to be
important sometimes we're going to want
to know if this parameter is larger or
smaller than something or if it's equal
to something or not equal to something
and those things are also important for
example if Theta actually measures the
true right so Theta is a true unknown
parameter true efficacy of a
drug okay let's say I want to know what
the true efficacy of a drug is and what
I'm going to want to know is you know
maybe it's a score maybe I'm going to
want to know if Theta is larer than two
maybe I want to know if Theta is the
average number of siblings is this true
number larger than two or not right
maybe I'm interested in knowing if
college students come from um uh so come
so maybe from a sociological perspective
I'm interested in knowing if college
students come from a household with more
than two children right so those can be
the questions that I may asking myself
right I'm going to want to know maybe
Theta is going to be equal to one half
or not so maybe for drug efficacy is it
completely standard maybe for elections
are the is the proportion of the
population that that is going to vote
for this particular candidate equal to
0.5 or is it different from
0.5 okay and I can think of different
things when I'm talking about the
regression I'm going to want to test if
this coefficient is actually zero or not
because if it's zero it means that the
variable that's in front of it actually
goes out and so those are things we're
testing actually having this very
specific yes no answer is going to give
me a
huge Intuition or a huge understanding
of what's going on in the phenomen that
I observe but actually since the
questions are so precise it's going to
be much more I'm going to be much better
at answering them rather than giving you
an estimate for Theta with some
confidence around
it all right it's the sort of the same
Principle as trying to reduce right what
you're trying to do as a statistician is
to inject as much knowledge about the
question and about the problem that you
can so that the data has to do a minimal
job and and force you actually need less
data right so for now on we will always
assume and this is because this is an
introstats class you will always assume
that Theta the subset of parameters is a
subset of R to the D that means that
Theta is a vector with at most a finite
number of
coordinates why do I say this well this
is called a parametric model so it's
called a parametric
model or sometimes parametric
statistics actually we don't really talk
about parametric statistics but we talk
a lot about non-parametric statistics or
a non-parametric model can somebody
think of a model which is non-p
parametric for example in the siblings
example if I did not cap the number
of siblings to seven but I left I let
this list go to
Infinity I would have an infinite number
of parameters to estimate very likely
the last ones would be zero but still I
would have an infinite number of
parameters to estimate so this would not
be a parametric model if I just let this
list of things to to be estimated to be
infinite but there's other classes that
are actually infinite and cannot be
represented by vectors for example
function
right if I tell you my
model
PF is just the distribution of
x's the probability distributions that
have
density F right so what I know is that
the density is not negative and that it
integrates to one right that's all I
know about
densities well f is not something you're
going to be able to describ with a
finite number of values right all
possible functions this is a huge set
it's certainly not representable by 10
numbers okay and so non-parametric
estimation is typically when you
actually want to parameterize this by a
large class of functions and so for
example histograms is the prime tool of
nonparametric estimation because when
you fit a histogram to data you're
trying to estimate the density of your
data but you're not trying to represent
represent it as a finite number of uh of
points even though that's really I mean
effectively you have to represent it
right so you actually truncate somewhere
and just say those things are not going
to matter all right but really the key
thing is that this is non parametric
where you have an infinite POS
potentially infinite number of
parameters whereas we're going to only
talk about finite and actually finite in
most most overwhelming majority of cases
is going to be one right so Theta is
going to be a subset of R1
okay we're going to be interested in
estimating one parameter just like the
parameter of a of a Pon or the parameter
of an exponential the parameter of
verley uh but uh for example rarely
we're going to be interested in
estimating mu and sigma Square for the
for the
normal
okay um so here are some statistical
Models All right so I'm going to go
through them with you
so we start right so if I tell you I
observe I'm interested in understanding
uh the I'm I'm still that shallow and
I'm interested in understanding the
proportion of people who kiss by bending
their head to the right and for that I
collected n observations and uh I'm
interested in making some inference in
the statistical model my question to you
is what is the statistical model well
well if you want to write the
statistical model you're going to have
to write this e oh sorry I never told
you what e was okay well actually let's
just go to uh the examples and then
you'll know what e is so uh I'm I'm uh
I'm you're going to have to write to me
an E and A P Theta okay so let's start
with the burnly
trials so this e
here is called the sample
space and in uh normal people's World
words it just means the space or the set
in
which X and back to your question X is
just a generic observation
lips okay and hopefully this is the
smallest you can think
of okay so for example for br trials I'm
going to observe a sequence of zeros and
ones so my experiment is going to be as
written on the board is going to be one
01 and then the probability
distributions are going to be well it's
just going to be the burnly
distributions indexed by P right so
rather than writing P sub P I'm going to
write it as
Bally P because it's clear what I mean
when I write
that is everybody uh Happy actually I
need to tell you something more this is
a family of distribution so I need p and
maybe I don't want to have P that takes
value Z or one right I mean it doesn't
make sense I would probably not look at
this problem if I anticipated that
everybody would kiss to the right and
everybody would or everybody would kiss
to the left so I'm going to assume that
P is in 01 but does not have zero in
one okay so that's a statistical model
for veral
trial okay
okay now the next one what do we have uh
exponential
okay okay so when I have exponential
distributions what is the support of the
exponential distribution what value is
can to
take zero to Infinity
right so what I have is that uh my first
space is the value that my r variables
can take so
it's well actually I can remove the zero
again zero to plus
infinity and then the family of
distributions that I have are
exponential with parameter Lambda and
again maybe you see me switching from P
to Lambda to Theta to Mu to Sigma Square
honestly you can do whatever you want
but it's just that it's customary to
have these particular Greek letters okay
and so the parameters of a of a uh
exponential are just positive
numbers okay and that's my uh
exponential uh uh
model what is the third one can somebody
tell
me
okay okay so
p uh is a p random variable discrete or
continuous go back to your probability
all right so the answer being the
opposite of
continuous good job um all right so it's
going to be what values can aant
take I'm all the natural integers right
so 0 one two three all the way to
Infinity we don't have any control of
this so I'm going to write this as n
without
zero uh I think in the slides it's n
star maybe actually no you can take
value zero I'm sorry this actually takes
value zero quite a lot that's the
typically Min is actually the mode uh so
it's n and then I'm going to write it
as with parameter well here it's again
Lambda as a parameter and Lambda can
take any positive value
okay and that's where you can actually
see that the model that we had for the
siblings right so let me actually just
squeeze in the
siblings uh model here
all right so that was the bad model that
I had in the first
place when I actually Capp this let's
say we we just capped it at seven forget
about larger than or equal to seven we
just assumed it was seven what was our
uh sample
space we said
seven so it's one
two to seven right those were the
possible values that this thing would
take and then what was my uh what What's
my parameter
space so that's going to be a nightmare
to write but I'm going to write it okay
so I'm going to write it as something
like
probability that X is equal to K is
equal to P sub
K okay and and uh that's going to be for
um
P okay so that's for all KS right for uh
k equal 127 and here the index is the
set of parameters
P1 to PK and I know a little more about
those guys right I know they're going to
be non-
negative PJ non- negative and I know
that the sum to one
okay
so maybe writing this you start seeing
why we like
those exponential and short notation
because I actually don't have to write
the pmf of a p i mean the p is really
just this but I call it P so I don't
have to rewrite this all the time and so
here I did not use a particular form so
I just have this thing and that's what
it is the set of parameters is the set
of positive numbers that s of uh sorry
P1 to p7
PK and some to seven right and so this
is just the list of uh of numbers that
are non- negative and some up to one so
that's my parameter
space okay so here that's my Theta this
whole thing
here this is my Capital
Theta
okay so that's just the set of
parameters that theeta the set of
parameters that Theta is allowed to take
okay and finally we're going to end with
the star of all and that's the normal
distribution and in the normal
distribution there's you still have also
some flexibility in terms of choices
because the N naturally the the normal
distribution is parameterized
by uh the normal distribution is
parameterized by two parameters right
mean and
variance I'm going to WR so what values
can a g ROM variable
take the entire real line
right and the set of parameters that
it's uh it can take so this is going to
be n mu Sigma
squ and mu is going to be positive and
sigma
square is going sorry mu is going to be
in
R and sigma square is going to be uh
positive okay so again here that's the
way you're supposed to write it if you
really want to identify what Theta
is well Theta formerly is the set of mu
Sigma squ such that
well in uh well R time 0 Infinity
right that's just to be formal but this
does the job just look just find it okay
you don't have to be super
form okay so uh that's not three that's
like five actually I just want to write
another one let's call it five
bit and five this is just
Gan with known
variance and this arises a lot in labs
when you have measurement error when you
actually receive your measurement device
this thing has been tested by the Manu
Factor are so much that they actually
comes and on the side of the box it says
that the standard deviation of your
measurements is going to be
0.23 okay and actually why they do this
is because they can brag about accuracy
right I mean that's how they sell you
this particular device and so you
actually know exactly what Sigma score
is so once you actually get your data in
the
lab you actually only have to estimate
new because Sigma comes as comes on the
label and so now what is your
statistical model well the numbers
you're going to be collecting still live
in
R but
now the the models that I have is n mu
Sigma
squ but the parameter space is not mu in
r in Sigma positive it's just mu in
R and to be a little uh more fatic about
this this is enough to describe it right
because if Sigma is the sigma that was
specified by the manufacturer then uh uh
this is the sigma you want but you can
actually write Sigma is equal to Sigma
square is equal to Sigma Square
manufacturer right you can just fix it
to be this particular value or maybe you
don't want to write an index that's
manufacturer and so you just say well
the sigma when I write Sigma Square what
I mean is the sigma square of the
manufacturer yeah
yeah yeah for a particular measuring
device you know you're in a lab and you
have some measuring device I don't know
uh something that measures the I tensile
strength uh of something and it's just
going to measure something and it will
naturally make errors but it's been
tested so much by the manufacturer that
they actually and calibrated by them
they know it's not going to be perfect
but they knew exactly what error it's
making because they've actually tried it
on thing for which they exactly knew
what the tensile strength
were okay
yeah
this oh like 5 uh Place
Prime
okay and we can come up with other
examples right so for example here's
another one
okay so the names don't really matter
right I mean uh you know I called it the
siblings model but you won't find the
siblings model in a textbook right so I
wouldn't worry too much but for example
let's say you have something so let's
call it six you
have uh I don't know a
truncated and that's the name I just
came up with but it's actually uh not uh
exactly describing what I want but let's
say I
observe Y which is the indicator of X
larger than say five when X follows some
exponential with parameter
Lambda okay this is what I get to
observe I only observe if my waiting
time was more than five minutes because
I see somebody coming out of the candle
station being really upset and that's
all I record it's been waiting for more
than 5 minutes
and that's all I get to record okay that
happens a lot these are called sensored
Data I should probably not call it uh
truned but this should be
censored okay you see a lot of sensored
data when you ask for people how much
they make they say well more than uh
five figures and uh that's all they want
to tell you okay and so you see a lot of
sensored data uh in um survival
analysis right you uh you're trying to
understand understand how long your
patients are going to live after some
surgery okay and uh and uh maybe you're
not going to keep people uh live and
you're not going to actually have their
being touching their family every day
and ask them if the guy still alive and
so what you can do is just to ask people
maybe five years after their study and
say please come in and you know you will
just have happen to have some people who
say well you know the person is deceased
and you will only be able to know that
the person deceased less than five years
ago I mean but uh you only see what
happens after that okay and so this is
this truned and sensored data happens
all the time just because you don't have
the availability to uh do better than
that so so so this could happen here so
now what is my statistical experiment
right so here I should really I should
probably write this like that because
just told you that my observations are
going to be X so there's some unknown y
I will never get to see this y I only
see to get to see the X
what is my statistical experiment please
help me so is it the real line my sample
space is it the real
line sorry do you know every who does
not know what this
means I'm sorry
okay so this is an called an indicator
so I I write it as it's if I wrote well
that would be one with a double bar you
can also write I if you prefer if you
don't feel like writing one double bars
and it's one
of uh say I'm going to write it like
that one of um a is equal to one if a is
true and zero if a is
false okay so that means that if Y is
larger than five this thing goes one is
one and if Y is not lar larger than five
this thing is zero
okay so that's called indicator
indicator
function
okay it's very useful to just turn
anything into a
zero1 so now that I'm
here what is my sample
space
01 what whatever this thing I did not
tell you was taking value was the thing
you should have uh if I end up telling
you that's taking value six or seven
that would be your example space okay um
okay so it takes value
01 and then uh what is the uh
probability here what should I write
here what should you write without even
thinking yeah so let's assume there's
two seconds before the end of the exam
you're going to write
burn and that's where you're going to
start checking if I'm going to give you
extra time okay so you write burnly
without thinking because it's taking
value zero one so you just write bur but
you still have to tell me what possible
parameters this thing is taking right so
I'm going to write it P because I don't
know and then
P takes value okay so
sorry I could write it like
that
right that would be perfectly valid but
actually no more it's not any P the p is
the probability that an exponential
Lambda is larger than five five and
maybe I want to have Lambda as a
parameter okay so what I need to
actually compute is what is the
probability that Y is larger than
five when Y is this exponential Lambda
which means that what I need to compute
is the integral between five and
Infinity of uh what it one over
Lambda how did I Define it in this class
I change what
oh yeah right right right you're right
Lambda e to the minus Lambda
X DX right so that's what I need to
compute what is
this yeah so what is the value of this
integral you take appropriate measures
okay and uh again that's just Bas
counsel us right so when I'm going to
integrate this guy those guys are going
to cancel I'm going to get zero for
Infinity I'm going to get a five for
this guy and uh well I know it's going
to be a positive number so I'm not
really going to bother with the sign
because I know that's what it should be
okay so I get e to the minus 5 Lambda
and so that means that I can actually
write this like that
and now parameterize this thing by
Lambda
positive okay so what I did here is I
changed the parameterization from P to
Lambda why well because maybe if this I
know this is happening maybe I'm
actually interested in reporting Lambda
to MBTA for example right maybe I'm
actually trying to estimate one over the
uh one over Lambda so that I know what
is the uh uh well Lambda is actually the
intensity of arrival of my uh of myal
process right if I have a PR process
that's where how my um my uh trains are
coming in and so I'm interested in
Lambda so I will parameterize things by
Lambda so that the thing I get is Lambda
you can play with this right I mean I
could parameterize this by one over
Lambda and put one over Lambda here if I
wanted but you know your the context of
your problem will tell you exactly how
to parameter
this
okay
um so uh what else I want to tell you
okay let's do a final
[Applause]
one by the way are you guys okay with u
you know PL exponential
burnly uh I don't know binomial normal
all these things I'm not going to go
back to it but I'm going to use them
heavily so you know just spend five
minutes on Wikipedia if you forgot about
what those things are uh usually you've
you must have seen them in your
probability class so that should not be
crazy name and again I'm not expecting
you I mean I don't remember what the
density of an exponential is so it would
be pretty unfair of me to actually ask
you to remember what it is even for the
gaon you're not expected to remember
what it is but I want you to remember
that you know if I add five to a gan
then I have a gon with me new plus 5 If
I multiply it by something right I need
you need to know how to to operate those
things so uh but uh knowing complicated
uh densities is definitely not part of
the game okay so um let's do final one I
don't know what number I have now I'm
going to just do
uniform that's another one everybody
knows what uniform is a uniform right so
I'm going to have X which uh my
observations are going to be uniform on
the interval 0 Theta right so if I want
to define a uniform
distribution uh for a random variable I
have to tell you which interval or which
set I want it to be uniform on and so
here I'm telling you is the interval
zero Theta and so what is going to be my
uh sample
space I'm sorry 0o to
Theta and then what is my uh probability
distribution my family of parameters
so well I can write it like this right
uniform Theta
right and Theta let's say is
positive can somebody tell me what's
wrong with what I
wrote this makes no
sense tell me
why yeah
yeah this set depends on Theta and why
is that a
problem there's no Theta right now
there's the families of thetas which one
did you pick here right there's no this
is just something that's indexed by
Theta but I could have very well written
it as uh you know just uh not being
great for a second I could have just
written this as T right rather than
Theta okay that would be the same and
then what the hell is
Theta there's no such thing as Theta we
don't know what the parameter is the
parameter should move with everyone and
so that means that I actually am not
allowed to pick this data I'm actually
just for the reason that there's no
parameter to put on the left side there
should not be right so you just said
well there's a problem because the
parameter is on the left hand side but
there's not even a parameter I'm
describing the family of possible
parameters there's no one that you can
actually plug it in so this should
really be one and I'm going to go back
to writing this as Theta because
that's pretty
standard is that clear for everyone I
cannot just pick one and put it in there
I just take the the the before I run my
experiment I could potentially get
numbers that are all the way up to one
because I don't know what Theta is going
to be ahead of time now if somebody
promised to me that Theta was going to
be less than 0.5 that would be sorry why
do I put one
here uh I could put Theta between zero
and one but if somebody's going to
promise me for example that Theta is
going to be less than one then yes I
could put zero
one all
right is that
clear okay so now you know how to answer
the question what is the statistical
model and again within the scope of this
class you will not be asked to just come
up with a model right that will just
tell you quest would be a probably good
idea here and then you would just have
to trust me that indeed would be a good
idea all right so what I started talking
about about uh 20 minutes ago so I was
definitely ahead of my of myself is the
notion so that's what I was talking
about well specified remember well
specified says that the true
distribution is one of the distribution
in this parametric families of
distribution the true distribution of my
siblings is actually a Pon with some
parameters and all I need to figure out
is what this parameter is
when I started saying that I said well
but then that could be that there are
several parameters that give me the same
distribution right it could be the case
that P five and P 17 are exactly the
same distributions when I start putting
those numbers in the formula which iced
okay so it could be the case that two
different numbers would give me exactly
the same probabilities and in this case
we see that the model is not
identifiable I mean the parameter is not
identifiable I cannot identify the
parameter even if you actually gave me
an infinite amount of data which means
that I could actually estimate exactly
the pmf I might not be able to go back
because there would be several
candidates and I would not be able to
tell you which one it was in the first
one okay so what we want is that this
function Theta maps to P Theta is
injective and that's really to be
fancy what I really mean is that if
Theta
is different from Theta Prime then P of
theta is different from P of theta prime
or if you prefer to think about the
contrapositive of this this is the same
as saying that if P Theta gives me the
same distribution as Theta Prime then
that implies that Theta must be equal to
Theta Prime right the logic those two
things are equivalent
right so that's what is what this means
that so this is we say that the
parameter
is identifiable or identified doesn't
really
matter in this
model
okay and this is something we're going
to want okay so in all the examples that
I gave you those those parameters are
completely identify right if I tell you
I mean if those things are in
probability box it means that they were
probably thought through right so when I
say exponential Lambda I'm really
talking about one specific distribution
and not uh uh there's not another Lambda
that's going to give me exactly the same
distribution okay so that was the case
and you can check that but it's a little
annoying so I would probably would not
do it but rather than doing this let me
just give you some examples where would
not be the case okay and here's an
example if I take X on
so now I'm back to just do using this
indicator
function but now for a gan right so what
I observe is X is the indicator that Y
is what did we say
positive okay so this is a burnly random
variable
right and it has some parameter P but P
now is going to depend sorry and here
what is
n new Sigma Square so the P the
probability that this thing is positive
is actually I don't think I put the zero
yeah it was oh yeah because I have Okay
so this distribution this P the
probability that it's positive it's just
the probability that some Galan is
positive and it will depend on mu and
sigma right because if I draw I have
zero and I draw uh my
gussan around mu then the probability of
being of this burnly being one is really
the area under the curve
here
right and this thing well if mu is very
large it's going to become very large if
mu is very small it's going to become uh
very small and if Sigma changes it's
also going to affect it is that clear to
everyone but we can actually compute
this right so so the parameter P that
I'm looking for here as a function of mu
and sigma is simply the probability that
some Y is non- negative which is the
probability that Yus mu / Sigma is
larger than minus mu ided
Sigma by the way when you uh studied
probability is that's some operation you
were used to making removing the mean
and dividing by the standard
deviation what is the effect of doing
that on this on the Gin random
variable yeah so you normalize it right
you standardize it you actually make it
a standard Gan you remove the mean it
becomes a mean zero Gan and you remove
the variance to for it to become one so
when you have a gan remove the mean and
divide by standard deviation it becomes
a standard Gan which this thing has n z
one distribution which is the one you
can read the quenes of at the end of the
book right and that's exactly what we do
did okay so now you have the probability
that some standard Gan
exceeds mu over Sigma which I can write
in terms of the cumulative distribution
function capital
F like we did in the first lecture so if
I do this cumulative distribution
function what is this probability in
terms of
five let
well that's what your name tag
says one
minus one minus mu over Sigma what
happened to F in this in in our you
think I defin this for
fun uh 1 minus
F of mu over Sigma
right right because this is one minus
the probability that it's less than this
and this is exactly the definition of
the cumulative dist
so in particular this thing only depends
on mu over
Sigma
agreed so in particular if I had 2 mu
over 2 Sigma P would remain
unchanged if I have 12 mu over 12 Sigma
this thing would remain in
change which mean that
P does not change if I scale mu and
sigma by the same factor so there's no
way
just by observing X even an infinite
amount of time so that I can actually
get exactly what p is I'm never going to
be able to get new n Sigma separately
all I'm going to be able to get is Mu
over Sigma so here we say that mu Sigma
the parameter mu Sigma or actually each
of them
individually those
guys they're not identifiable
but the parameter mu over Sigma is
identifiable so if I wanted to write a
statistical model in which the parameter
is
identifiable I would
write
veral and then I would write 1 minus
pi over of mu over
Sigma and then I would take two
parameters which are mu and R and sigma
squ
positive or let's right Sigma
positive right
no this is not identifiable I cannot
write those two guys as being two things
different instead what I want to write
is
Vernal 1 minus
and now my
parameter
uh I forgot
this uh my parameter
is Mu over Sigma can somebody tell me
where mu over Sigma
lives what values can this thing
take any real value
right okay so now I've done this
definitely out of conven venience right
because that was the only thing I was
able to identify the ratio of mu over
Sigma but it's still something that has
some meaning it's the stand it's the
normalized mean it really tells me what
the mean is compared to the standard
deviation so in some models in reality
in some real applications this actually
might have a good meaning for me it's
just telling me how big the mean is
compared to the standard fluctuations of
this model but I won't be able to get
more than
that I
all
right
so now that we've set a parametric model
let's try to see what our goals are
going to
be okay so now we have a sample and a
statistical model and we want to
estimate the parameter Theta and I could
say well you know what I don't have time
for this analysis collecting data is
going to take me a while so I'm just the
and I'm going to say that over Sigma is
for I'm just going to give it to you and
maybe you will tell me ah not very good
right so we need some measure of
performance of a given parameter we need
to be able to evaluate if you know
eyeballing the problem is worse than
actually collecting a large amount of
data we need to know if even if I come
up with an estimator that actually sort
of uses the data does it make an
efficient use of the data would I
actually need 10 times more observations
to achieve the same accuracy so to be
able to answer these questions well well
I need to Define what accuracy means and
accuracy is something that sort of makes
sense it says well I want Theta hat to
be close to Theta and but Theta hat is a
random variable so I'm going to have to
understand what it means for a random
variable to be close to a deterministic
number and
so what is the parameter an estimator
right so I have an estimator and I said
it's a random
variable and the formal definition
so an estimator is a
measurable
function of the
data okay so when I write Theta hat and
that will typically be my notation for a
uh an estimator right I should really
write Theta hat of
X1
xn okay that's what an estimator is so
if you want to know what the estimator
is this is a measurable function of the
data and it's actually also known
as a
statistic and you know if you're
interested in you know I I I see every
day I think uh when I have like you know
a uh dinner with normal people uh and
they say I'm a statistician oh yeah
really like baseball and they talk to me
about you know batting averages like
that's not what I do but for them that's
what it is and that's because in a way
that's what a statistic is a batting
average is a
statistic okay and so here are some
examples you can take the average X and
bar you can take the maximum of your
observation that's the statistics you
can take the first one you can take the
first one plus log of one plus the
absolute value of the last one you can
do whatever you want that will be an
estimator some of them are clearly going
to be bad but that's still a statistic
and you can do this now when I say
measurable I always have uh so you know
gradu students sometimes ask me like
yeah how do I know if this estimator is
measurable or not and usually my answer
is well if I give you data can you
compute it and they say yeah I'm like
well then it's measurable that's a very
good rule to check if you can actually
if you're uh something is actually
measurable when is this thing not
measurable is when it's implicitly
defined okay and in particular the
things that can give you problems are
uh well oh yeah soup or INF anybody
knows what a soup or an INF is it's like
a Max or a Min but that's not always a
Tain okay so if I have X1 so if I look
at uh the infim of the function f ofx
for X on the real line and F ofx sorry
let's say X on one infinity and F ofx is
equal to 1 /x right then the infinum is
the smallest value it can take except
that it does not really take it it's
zero right right because 1 /x is going
to zero but it's never really getting
there so we just call the in zero but
it's not the value that it ever takes
and this things might actually be
complicated to compute and so that's
when you actually have problems right
when the limit is not you're not really
quite reaching the limit you won't have
this problem in general but just so you
know that nstimer is not really anything
it has to actually be
measurable okay so the first thing we
want to know I mentioned it is uh so an
estimator is a statistic which does not
depend on data of course okay so if I
give you the data you have to be able to
compute it and that probably should not
require not knowing an unknown
parameter okay so an estimator is said
to be consistent if when my data when I
collect more and more data this thing is
getting closer and closer to the true
parameter all right and we said that you
know eyeballing and saying that is going
to be four is not really something
that's probably going to be consistent
but they can have things that are
consistent but that are converted ing
TOA at different speeds okay and we know
also that there's this is a random
variable it converges to something and
we there might be some different Notions
of convergence that kick in and actually
they are and we see that it's weakly
convergent if it converges in
probability and strongly convergent it
spe converges almost
surely okay and this is just vocabulary
it won't make a big difference okay so
we will typically say it's consistent
but you say any of the two
um
well so in parametric statistics it's
actually a little difficult to come up
with but in non-parametric ones I could
just say if I have Yi XI
Yi and I know that Yi is f of x i plus
some noise Epsilon I and I know that F
belongs to some class of functions let's
say so class of smooth functions massive
right and now I'm going to actually find
the following estimator I'm going to
take the average so I'm going to do Le
squares
right right so I just check I'm trying
to minimize the distance of each of my f
of XI to my Yi and now I want to find
the smallest of
them okay so if I look at the infimum
here then the question is uh um so that
could be uh well that's not really an
estimator for f but it's an estimator
for the smallest possible value and so
for example uh this is actually an
estimator for the variance of Sigma
Square this might not be attained and
this might not need be measurable if f
is massive right so that's the info vers
some class F of okay so those are always
things that are defined implicitly if
it's an average for example it's
completely measurable
okay any other
question
okay so we know that the first thing we
might want to check and that's
definitely something we want about an
estimator is that it's consistent
because all consistency tells us is that
the as I collect more and more data my
estimator is going to get closer and
closer to the
parameter there's other things we can
look at for each possible value of n now
right now I'm have I have a finite
number of
observations 25 and I want to know
something about my estimator the first
thing I want to check is maybe if in
average right so this is a random
variable is this random variable in
average going to be close to Theta or
not and so the difference how far I am
from Theta is actually called the
bias okay so the bias of an
estimator is is the expectation of theta
hat minus the value that I hope it gets
which is Theta if this thing is equal to
zero we said that Theta hat is
unbiased and unbiased estimators are
things that people are looking for in
general the problem is that there's lots
of unbiased estimators and so it might
be misleading to look for unbiasedness
when that's not really the only thing
you should be looking for
okay so what does it mean to be
unbiased maybe for this particular round
of data you collected you're actually
pretty far from the true
estimator but uh one thing that actually
uh uh what it means is that if I redid
this experiment over and over and over
again and I averaged all the values of
my estimators that I got then this would
actually be the right the true
parameter okay that's what it means it's
if I were to repeat this experiment in
average I would actually get the right
thing but you don't get to repeated
experiment Ty okay just a remark about
estimators look at this estimator xn bar
right think of the kiss example I'm
looking at the average of my
observations and I want to know what the
expectation of this thing
is okay now this guy
is by linearity of the the expectation
is this
right but my data is identically
distributed so in particular all the XIs
have the same expectation right is that
everybody agrees with this when it's
identically distributed they all get the
same
expectation so what it means is that
this guys
here they're all equal to the
expectation of
X1 right so what it means is that this
guy
I have the average of the same number so
this is actually the expectation of
X1 okay and it's true in the kiss
example this was
p and this is
p the probability of turning your head
right okay so those two things are the
same in particular that means that xn
bar and just X1 have the same
bias so that should probably illustrate
to you that bias is not something that
really is telling you the entire
picture right I I can take only one of
my observations burnly 01 this thing
will have the same bias as if I average
a thousand of
them so the bias is really telling me
where I'm in average but it's really not
telling me what fluctuations I'm getting
and so if you want to start having
fluctuations coming into the picture we
actually have to look at the risk or the
quadratic risk of an estimator and so
the quadratic risk is the find as the
expectation of the square distance
between Theta hat and
Theta
okay so let look let's look at
this so the quadratic
risk sometimes it's denoted people call
it the L2
risk of theta hat of course
worse I'm sorry for maintaining such an
ugly board I keep this uh
stuff
uh okay so I look at the square distance
between Theta hat and Theta this is
still this is a function of a random
variable so it's a random variable as
well and I'm looking at the expectation
of this guy okay that's the
definition I claim that when this thing
goes to zero then my estimator is
actually going to be consistent
everybody agreed with
this so
if
uh goes to zero as n goes to infinity
and here I don't need to tell you what
kind of convergence I have because this
is just a number right it's an EXT
expectation so it's a regular usual
calculus th convergence then that
implies that Theta hat is actually
weekly
consistent what do they use to tell you
this yeah this is the convergence in L2
right this actually is strictly
equivalent this is by definition saying
that Theta hat converges in L2
2 to
Theta and we know that convergence in L2
implies
convergence in probability to Theta
right that with the picture we're going
up and this is actually equivalent to
weak consistency by definition of weak
consistency okay so this is actually
telling me a little more because this
guy here they're both unbiased Thea xn
bar is unbiased
X1 isn't biased but X1 is certainly not
consistent because the more data I
collect I'm not even doing anything with
it I'm just taking the first data point
you're giving to me so they're both
unbiased but this one is not consistent
and this one we'll see is actually
consistent xn bar is consistent and
actually we've seen that last time and
that's because of
the what guarantees the fact that X and
bar is consistent
law of large numbers right actually it's
strongly consistent because of a strong
LW of large numbers okay so just uh for
in the last two minutes I want to tell
you a little bit about how this risk uh
uh is linked to see I says quadratic
risk is equal to B squ plus variance so
let's see what I mean by
this so I'm going to forget about the
absolute values I have a square I don't
really need
them if Theta hat was unbiased this
thing would be the expectation of theta
hat right it might not be the case so
let me see how I can actually see put
the bias in there well one way to do
this is to see that this is equal to the
expectation of theta hat minus
expectation of theta hat plus
expectation of theta
hat minus
Theta okay I just removed the same and
added the same thing so I didn't change
anything now this guy is my bias
right so now let me expand the square so
what I get is the expectation of the
square of theta hat minus its
expectation should put some square
bracket plus two
times the cross product so the cross
product is what expectation of theta hat
minus expectation of theta
Hat
Time expectation of theta
hat minus
Theta and then I have the last
Square expectation of theta hat minus
Theta
squ okay so Square cross product Square
everybody's with
me now this guy
here if you pay attention this thing is
the expectation of some random variable
so it's a deterministic
number data is the true parameter it's a
deterministic number so what I can do is
pull out this entire thing out of the
expectation like
this all right and compute the
expectation only with respect to that
part but what is the expectation of this
thing it's zero right expectation of
theta hat minus expectation of theta hat
is zero so this entire thing is equal to
zero so now when I actually collect back
my uh my quadratic terms my two square
terms in this
expansion what I get is that the
expectation of theta hat minus Theta 2
is equal to the expectation of Theta hat
minus expectation of theta hat
squ plus the square of expectation of
theta
hat minus
Theta right so those are just the two uh
the first and the last term of the
previous
equality now here I have the expectation
of the square of the difference between
a random variable and its
expectation this is otherwise known as
the variance right so this is actually
equal to the
variance of theta
hat and this well this was the bias we
already said that there so this whole
thing is the bias
Square okay and hence the quadratic term
is the sum of the variance and the
squared bias y squar bias well because
otherwise you would add dollars and
dollars squares squared right so you
need to add dollar squared and do Square
so that this thing is actually
homogeneous okay so if x is in dollars
then the bias is in dollars but the
variance is in dollar squ okay and the
square here forc you to put everything
on the Square uh scale right so what's
nice is that if the quadratic risk goes
to zero then since I have the sum of two
positive terms both of them have to go
to zero that means that my variance is
going to zero very little fluctuations
and my bias is also going to zero which
means that I'm actually going to be on
target once I reduce my fluctuations
because it's one thing to reduce the
fluctuations but if I'm not on target
it's an issue right for example the
estimator four the value four has no
variance every time I'm going to repeat
the experiment I'm going to get four
four four four variance is zero but the
bias is bad the bias is four minus Theta
and if Theta is far than far from four
that's not doing very well okay so um
next week uh we will uh well we'll talk
about uh what is a good estimate what
what how estimators change if they have
high variance or uh uh low variance so
uh or high bias and low bias and we'll
talk about confidence intervals as well
all right